.Dd July 24, 2017
.Dt RATIONALIS 1
.Os
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm rationalis
.Nd Automatic accounting command-line tool
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm convert
.Op Fl r Ar rules-file
.Op Fl i Ar input-file
.Op Fl o Ar output-file
.Nm
.Cm fetch Ar fetcher
.Op Fl u Ar user-name
.Op Fl o Ar output-file
.Op Fl p Ar period
.Op Fl P Ar password
.Nm
.Cm pull Ar account
.Op Fl c Ar config-file
.Op Fl r Ar rules-file
.Op Fl P Ar password
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a command-line tool that fetches and converts monetary transaction
data from various sources and converts them to the
.Xr ledger 1
journal format.
The conversion step can be customized using pattern based rules.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Global options
The command line flags to change the behaviour of
.Nm
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl -config Ar file
Use the supplied
.Ar file
as the configuration file instead of the default one.
.It Fl r , Fl -rules Ar file
Use the supplied
.Ar file
as the rules file instead of the default one.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Commands
The commands accepted by
.Nm
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm convert
Convert transactions to the
.Xr ledger 1 journal format.
.Pp
The command line flags to change the behaviour of the
.Cm convert
command are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl o , Fl -output-file Ar file
Specify an output
.Ar file ,
if the flag is not provided stdout is used.
.It Fl i , Fl -input-file Ar file
Specify an input
.Ar file ,
if the flag is not provided stdin is used.
.El
.It Cm fetch Ar fetcher
Run a
.Ar fetcher
to get transaction data from remote sources.
More info about fetchers can be found in the
.Sx Fetchers
subsection of this manual.
.Pp
The command line flags to change the behaviour of the command are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl o , Fl -output-file Ar file
Specify an output
.Ar file ,
if the flag is not provided stdout is used.
.It Fl p , Fl -period Ar time-period
Fetch transactions only for the given
.Ar time-period .
.It Fl P , Fl -password Ar password
Provide the
.Ar password
on the command line instead of asking for it.
.It Fl u , Fl -user Ar user-name
User name which will be passed to the fetcher.
.El
.It Cm pull
The
.Cm pull
command is used to get automatically transactions from a remote
location and store them in your ledger directory of choosing. It is a
combination of the
.Cm fetch
and
.Cm convert
command.
.Pp
The command line flags to change the behaviour of the command are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl P , Fl -password Ar password
Provide the
.Ar password
that will get passed to the fetcher.
.El
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Fetchers
A fetcher is a standalone executable, its primary function is to fetch
transactions from a remote source and format it to the
.Nm
input format for consumption.
.Nm
executes the fetcher and passes it's stdin to the fetcher, it also catches it's
stdout. Messages from a fetcher can be output via stderr.
The input format is discussed in the next subsection
.Sx Input format .
.Pp
.Nm
passes the fetcher varying information through environment variables, e.g. user
credentials. The environment variables are listed and described in the
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
section.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Input format
The input format for rationalis is in the json format.
The transactions are json objects contained in a list.
.Pp
The transaction object itself contains the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm description
The free-form description of the transaction. The type of this field is a
string.
.It Cm payeePosting | payerPosting
The
.Cm payeePosting
and
.Cm payerPosting
fields are json lists containing as the
first element of the list a string describing the source and target account of the
transaction e.g. "Assets:Checking". The second element is a list containing as
the first element a floating point number describing the amount and as a second
element a string representing the currency of the transaction.
.It Cm transactionComment
A free-form comment for the transaction. The type of this field is string
and it can be null.
.It Cm transactionDate
A string containing the date of the transaction in the
.St -iso8601
(YYYY-MM-DD) format.
.It Cm transactionID
An ID that uniquely identifies the transaction,
.Nm
doesn't use this field
itself but a fetcher should use this field to avoid fetching the same
transaction multiple times. The type of this field is string.
.El
.Pp
An example transaction can be found in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section of this manual.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
will set the following environment variables before starting a fetcher:
.Bl -tag -width "RATIONALIS_FROM_DATE"
.It Ev RATIONALIS_USER
Set to the string passed with the user command line switch if the
.Cm fetch
command is used
or to the user for a given account in the configuration file if used with the
.Cm pull
command.
.It Ev RATIONALIS_PASSWORD
Set to the string passed with the password command line switch.
.It Ev RATIONALIS_FROM_DATE
Set to the start date passed with the period command line switch.
.It Ev RATIONALIS_TO_DATE
Set to the end date passed with the period command line switch.
.It Ev RATIONALIS_LAST_ID
Only set for the
.Cm pull
command, and only set if a valid history entry exists for the given account.
It's set to the ID of the most recently fetched transaction.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh FILES
.Nm
supports the XDG Base Directory Specification, the default locations can be
overridden using appropriate environment variables.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width DS -compact
.It Pa ~/.config/rationalis/config
Default location of the configuration file.
The format of the configuration file is described in
.Xr rationalis 5 .
.Pp
.It Pa ~/.config/rationalis/rules
Default location of the rules file.
The format of the rules file is described in
.Xr rationalis.rules 5 .
.Pp
.It Pa ~/.local/share/rationalis/history
Default location of the transaction history file.
This file is used to store the transaction ID of the last fetched transaction
for a given account.
It is passed on to the fetcher via an environment variable to avoid fetching
already processed transactions.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example shows a a input file containing a single transactions:
.Bd -literal
[
    {
        "transactionComment": "got a 💗, bailing now",
        "payerPosting": [
            "Assets:CTB",
            [
                -5000,
                "Rupee"
            ]
        ],
        "transactionDate": "2017-07-07",
        "transactionID": "CTB-101001",
        "payeePosting": [
            "Expenses:???",
            [
                5000,
                "Rupee"
            ]
        ],
        "description": "ATM WEST CLOCK TOWN"
    }
]
.Ed
.Pp
The following example shows how to run
.Nm
to convert the previous transaction to the ledger format, the transactions are
contained in the transactions.json file:
.Bd -unfilled
$ rationalis convert -i transactions.json
2017/07/07 * ATM WEST CLOCK TOWN
    Assets:CTB                       -5000.00 Rupee ; ID: CTB-101001
    Expenses:???                      5000.00 Rupee ; got a 💗, bailing now
.Ed
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ledger 1 ,
.Xr rationalis 5 ,
.Xr rationalis.rules 5
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Damir Jelić Aq Mt poljar@termina.org.uk .
