.Dd July 24, 2017
.Dt RATIONALIS.RULES 5
.Os
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm rationalis.rules
.Nd rationalis pattern based rules file
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
rationalis has the ability to modify transactions based on rules in the
pattern/action format.
A rationalis rule consists of a rule heading followed by patterns and
afterwards by suitable actions. The specified patterns need to match for the
actions to be executed.
.Pp
Only the first rule that matches gets executed for a given transaction.
The rule heading is used to name the rule, an arbitrary name can be chosen
enclosed in square brackets
.Ns e.g. Bq Em My Rule .
Comments can be put anywhere in the file using a hash mark
.Pq Sq # ,
and extend to the end of the current line.
.Pp
The patterns part of the rule is further explained in the
.Sx PATTERNS
section as well as the action part in the
.Sx ACTIONS
section.
.Pp
The full grammar of the rationalis rules language can be found in the
.Sx GRAMMAR
section.
Some useful examples are found in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh PATTERNS
A pattern consists of an object followed by a pattern match function that
takes an quoted string as an argument.
Multiple arguments can be passed to the function if they are separated by the
.Sq Cm or
keyword.
.Pp
Multiple patterns can be defined in a rule.
The actions will only be executed if all patterns match.
.Pp
Objects are divided into single word objects and two word objects. The two word
objects are used to select the source and target posting in the transaction
while the single word objects operate on the first line of the ledger journal
entry.
.Pp
The following objects can be used in a pattern:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Ic description
Select the description of the transaction.
.It Ic comment
Select the comment of the transaction.
.It Cm payer Cm account | Cm currency
Select the payer posting and select either the
.Cm account
or the
.Cm currency
of the posting.
.It Cm payee Cm account | Cm currency
Select the payee posting and select either the
.Cm account
or the
.Cm currency
of the posting.
.El
.Pp
The following pattern matching functions can be used:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic is Ar string
Matches if the object of the pattern is equal to the
.Ar string
of the pattern match
function.
.It Ic matches Ar regular-expression
Matches if the object of the pattern matches to the
.Ar regular-expression
provided to the pattern match function.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh ACTIONS
Actions are used to modify one or more fields in the ledger journal entry. An
action consists of an action function that operates on an object. Every defined
action will be executed if the provided patterns match.
The objects that can be used in a pattern can be used in an action as well.
.Pp
The following objects can be used in an action:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Ic description
Select the description of the transaction.
.It Ic comment
Select the comment of the transaction.
.It Cm payer Cm account | Cm currency
Select the payer posting and select either the
.Cm account
or the
.Cm currency
of the posting.
.It Cm payee Cm account | Cm currency
Select the payee posting and select either the
.Cm account
or the
.Cm currency
of the posting.
.El
.Pp
The following action functions can be used:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic set Ar object Ar string
Set the
.Ar object
to the
.Ar string
provided to the action function.
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh GRAMMAR
Syntax for
.Nm
in BNF:
.Bd -literal
rule               = ( rule-heading [match-block] [action-block] )

rule-heading       = '[' rule-name ']'
match-block        = match-clause+
action-block       = action-clause+

match-clause       = ( object match-verb argument {'or' argument})
action-clause      = ( 'set' object argument )

object             = single-word-object | two-word-object
single-word-object = 'description' | 'comment'
two-word-object    = adjective noun

match-verb         = 'is' | 'matches'

adjective          = 'payer' | 'payee'
noun               = 'account' | 'currency'

argument           = '"' word+ '"'
.Ed
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width 34 -compact
.It Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rationalis/rules
Default location of the rationalis rules file.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
In this example we have a rule named "atm", the rule checks the description of
a transaction using a regular expression.
In the event of a matching transaction the rule changes the description and the
payee account of the transaction.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[atm]
description matches "BANK ATM*"
set description "ATM CASH"
set payee account "Expenses:Cash"
.Ed
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ledger 1 ,
.Xr rationalis 1 ,
.Xr rationalis 5
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Damir Jelić Aq Mt poljar@termina.org.uk .
