.Dd July 24, 2017
.Dt RATIONALIS.CONF 5
.Os
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm rationalis.conf
.Nd rationalis configuration file
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr rationalis 1 reads configuration data in the INI file format.
The configuration file is used to configure
.Nm rationalis
accounts, the sections inside the configuration file represent an account.
.Pp
The section name enclosed in square brackets represents the account name for the
.Cm pull
command.
The following keys are required in the account sections:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm fetcher
Either a full path to a executable or a executable contained in the
.Ev PATH
of the user calling
.Nm rationalis .
.It Cm user
The user that
.Nm rationalis
will pass to the fetcher for authentication purposes on the remote source.
.It Cm ledger-dir
The output directory where rationalis will store the converted transactions. It
is recommended to use a separate directory for every account and include the
whole directory inside your main ledger file.
.Pp
The files will have a unique name consisting of the account name followed by the
current date and followed by an optional suffix if there are more than one file
for the current account and date combination.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh FILES
.Nm rationalis
supports the XDG Base Directory Specification, the default locations can be
overridden using appropriate environment variables.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 34 -compact
.It Pa ~/.config/rationalis/config
Default location of the configuration file.
.El
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example shows a configured account with the name
.Em clocktown ,
the fetcher with a full path to the executable
.Em ct-fetch ,
the user
.Em Ben ,
and the ouput dir
.Pa /home/ben/ledger/ct .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[clocktown]
fetcher: /usr/local/bin/ct-fetch
user: Ben
ledger-dir : /home/ben/ledger/ct
.Ed
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ledger 1 ,
.Xr rationalis 5 ,
.Xr rationalis.rules 5
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Damir Jelić Aq Mt poljar@termina.org.uk .
